Ok so,
welcome back!
Today we are going to talk a little
bit about
constant variables in C++.
Sometimes it is necessary
to have variables that are constant.
That is,
variables that only have one value.
set by the user when declared and that
is it.
Constant variables are
declared using
the keyword const,
so like this.
Oops!
const, so this is the keyword to
declare a constant variable.
Ah,
we do not want to change
this value
ever
like
the value of number Pi. So if Pi is
Let's round it up to 3.14
We do not want to change the value
of this number through the whole code.
So, you would declare it as a
constant value.
So, you just type in
like const
pi = I don't know
3.14 there you go.
And so this would be so for
the entire program.
Anyway,
So, let's go ahead and
write a short program and see how
this works in order to basically
just demonstrate this point. We're
going to write two short programs or more
just to see how it works.
So, we leave what we have
by now this
template of sorts
you can save these codes somewhere
if you want.
These lines of code, you can separate
them into different projects or
sub projects or sub chapters,
whatever you want.
But I usually create just one project
file per a chapter
so that I have at least some orientation.
However, I already have this written,
my notes all of it so I don't think I even
need to save it, really.
Let's go ahead and type in int.
x and declare an integer value,
which will be 5.
So, this is a regular variable of x
of value
5.
The value of this variable of course can
be changed.
For example, we can
we have initialize it to
variable x to value 5.
But we can
do this
x=10
So, now we have effectively changed
the value of variable x.
However,
down below we typed in
const
int y
=
that's it!
constant variable y
of value 3.
Basically, the value of this
variable cannot
be changed
So, if I type in
I don't know, y
is equal to 6.
And if I just go ahead and try to
build and compile this,
we can see that I am going to get an
error.
I cannot change it at all.
If I just delete this.
And run and compile again.
You see the program runs
without any problems.
You might notice that I am not
really familiar to all
shortcuts in Codeblocks.
I just find it
I don't use it in general. I really always
use clips.
Or spider or Python development
environment as well.
But I like to use CodeBlocks
for teaching people
because it is very simple
to grasp and to understand,
and to get around with this.
It is one of the base ones.
Moving on,
from there.
Syntax for the declaration of variable
is pretty much as follows, so you
type in the keyword
cosnt
and then you would type in the type.
In this case it is an int
and then of course the name
of the variable in this case it is
y
We can also write
const
after the type,
which can be a little bit
strange but no big deal.
Let me just give you an example
with that.
I can type in int
const z =
100; so this is exactly the same
as me writing
const int
z = 100
So, don't be confused if you see this two.
it is exactly the same.
There is no difference of whatsoever
so we don't need to worry about that.
Keep in mind that a constant variable must
be
initialized upon declaration of
that variable.
Otherwise,
you will get a...
the program will not compile.
So, if I
do this,
const
int
w
It will simply say that,
it will simply give us an error and say
w should not have been initialized.
You see,
I would immediately get an error there.
Ok.
Yup, this is
Sorry, I cannot redeclare
const set because I already declared
and initialized it there
I just do this s
do it like that.
Let's run and compile now.
Excellent.
Since it's const int w, this is
unitialized
so that's a problem.
Because we need to initialize it.
If I simply
initialize it to whatever,
there you go, the program
is going to run without any difficulties,
without any problems of whatsoever.
problem solved.
It should be noted that
there is difference
between constant variables and C++
So, I'm guessing that most of you
who are learning about C++ have
at least
heard about C
Linux for example the operating system
is written in C.
Pretty much the fastest operating system
on planet earth that is currently used.
And the most awesome operating
system.
However, Windows is C++.
And since we are learning C++, I am
using a virtual machine of Windows.
C
is faster
than C++
in a lot of things.
or so it is stated.
And the declaration of variables. A lot
of things are different in C.
But then again
a lot of things are very
similar.
And C has a very tricky syntax,
which is a little difficult
to grasp but definitely
not impossible.
I might actually design a course
for C
in regard to the current development of
Linux, which can be an interesting thing
but those are future plans.
I just wanted to mention that.
So, that's why
everytime we make a new project,
I clearly state
select C++ because if you select C,
a lot of things will work
pretty much the same way
that they do in C++
but then you will run into something,
where you get an error for no reasons
for
reasons unknown to you.
And you won't be able to understand why.
Well,
C and C++ they are very similar but
then again, C++ has a lot
is a lot different in a lot of regards.
And that's a story for another time.
To compare the differences between
C and C++ and why C++ came after C etc.
That's a very very long
explanation, so I am going
to go ahead and skip that here.
We're going to go ahead and jump
into yet another example
of pretty much the same things here.
Let's go ahead and delete this.
And you see here, where it says
include IOstream,
I can also define a value.
I can do this
and define
Pi
at 3.14159
So this is a defined macro constant.
Pi
with value
3.14159
But this is going to work on C.
I don't really see any reason why
it actually won't work in C++.
Let's just run it.
Yup, it's going to run here as well
no problems. But this is like
as C uses macro constants, macro
commands are those compiler executes
before compiling.
One such command is include
that you have here.
and you have this example here,
where we are defining the value
of Pi.
By convention, constant variables are
written in uppercase as you can see.
This is the variable name.
Ok then,
so
let's go
let's go ahead and
continue
onwards.
I probably should have written this
4.
I should remove all of this.
3.14 then it is going to be
like this.
Let's go ahead
and move on.
Here,
and we'e gonna just
do again a basic prompt of the user
to input something.
cout
Enter
circle
radius.
Ok, simple enough.
I'm pretty sure that a user will
be able to do that.
And then we're goign to type in down
below
float
radius. So this will declare a
variable
in which we will store the input.
If I mispelled something, please
forgive me.
Now, we need to type in std.
::
cin >>
radius
and ok
this
So, this will actually be pulling the
input from the keyboard.
and we will be storing it
into the variable radius.
Next up,
we will type in float.
circle
_
area
=Pi
multiplied by
radius
If we include the math function,
we won't actually
multiply a radius by radius
there would be a square
which we could
immediately utilize but more of that
later.
radius
and there we go.
So, we're going to get a
square
It's going to be Pi times
radius square.
We're declaring a variable circle
area, and then we are using the formula
to compute
the circle of the area.
The Area of the Circle, my apologies.
std::
cout
Circle's
radius
I don't know,
circle_
area
std::
endl
there we go
So this will print out the area unto
the screen
the compiler
replaced Pi
with the given number so 3.14
before compiling.
That is the line
with float circle
area = Pi so.
So float circle_area =
Pi
times radius times radius, again
it's replaced with the following.
So,
we'll just
copy this line one more time,
You don't need to do this,
I'm just doing this for demo.
3.14
So, this is what will happen during
the compile time.
as this Pi
has been replaced
with the value
that has been defined right here.
So, there is no
so, that there is no confusion
there.
This whole
program
what we have
just
written
before compiling will pretty much
look like this.
This will be fine.
This will again
be fine.
All of this.
and this is the place where
things are going to change so,
before compiling
just imagine that this line here
does not exist.
So this would
this is how the entire program will look
before compiling.
This is the only thing here that will
pretty much change
and that is it.
That is what I wanted to show you here.
Ok, so now, I'm going to
go ahead and
bid you farewell, and we shall start
with
Ok, so we'll go into
the follow up tutorial
and I think we will have just two more
tutorials in this chapter and we will
move
onwards.